This is Jocko podcast number 64 with Echo Charles and me,
Jocko Willink.
Good evening.
Good evening in a country that most people would struggle to find on a map in a
compound that few possess the courage to enter.
Okay.
Men from my previous life took the fight to our enemy
in that compound,
they found men that pray five times a day for your destruction.
Yeah.
Those praying men don't know me.
They don't know you and they don't know America.
Okay?
They don't understand our compassion,
our freedoms,
and our tolerance.
I know it may seem as if some of those things are currently missing,
but they remain at our core and always will.
Our capacity for them is boundless and is only dwarfed by the hatred in those
men hiding in that compound,
the hatred they have for you.
Those men don't care about your religious beliefs.
They don't care about your political opinions.
They don't care if you sit on the left or the right liberal or Conservative,
pacifist or warrior.
They don't care how much you believe in diversity,
equality,
or freedom of speech.
They don't care.
I'm sorry.
You have never smelled the breath of a man who wants to kill you.
You've never felt the alarm bells ringing in your body.
The combination of fear and adrenaline as you move towards the fight instead of
running from it.
I'm sorry.
You've never heard someone cry out for help or cried out for help yourself.
Relying on the courage of others to bring you home.
I'm sorry.
You've never tasted the salt from your own tears.
As you stand at flag draped coffins bearing men,
you were humbled to call your friends.
I don't wish those experiences on you,
but
I do wish you had them.
If you had them,
it would change the way you act.
It would change the way you value it would change the way you appreciate it.
Yeah,
you would become quick to open your eyes and slowed open your mouth.
Most will never understand the sacrifice required to keep evil men like those
from that distant compound away from our doorstep.
Okay,
but it would not hurt you to try and understand.
It would not hurt you to take a moment to respect the sacrifices that others
make on your behalf.
Whether they share your opinions or not.
You're would not hurt you.
To take a moment to think of the relentless drain on family,
friends,
and loved ones that are left behind sometimes for weeks,
sometimes for months,
sometimes for years.
Yeah,
sometimes forever.
Yeah.
Ideas are not protected by words.
Paper and ink may outline the foundation and principles of this nation,
but it is blood only blood
that protects it.
Dusty compound a man you have never met,
gave everything he had so that you have the freedom to think,
speak,
and act however you choose.
Yeah,
he went there for all of us.
Whether you loved or hated what he stood for.
Okay.
He went there to preserve the opportunity and privilege to believe,
to be and to become what we want.
This country,
every single person living inside of its borders and under the banner of its
flag.
Oh that man,
we owe that man everything we owe him,
the respect that his sacrifice deserves
same.
Thank you is not enough.
We send our best and lose them in the fight against the worst evil this world
has to offer.
If you want to respect and honor their sacrifice,
it needs to be more than words.
You have to live it.
Take a minute and look around,
soak it in,
all of it.
The good,
the bad,
and the ugly.
You have the choice every day as to which category you want to be in,
in which direction you want to move.
You have that choice because the best among us,
the best we ever had to offer,
fought and bled and died for it.
Don't ever forget that.
Okay.
Now
those words were any piece that was called a debt that cannot be repaid.
Yeah,
which was written by a fellow CEO
and a friend of mine named Andy Stumpf.
When he heard that we had lost another frog bear
chief Ryan Owens during a daring raid on an al Qaeda compound in Yemen.
Okay.
Man,
it was a very fitting tribute,
another fitting tribute,
yet another fitting tribute to yet another great warrior who sacrificed
everything
for us.
One of the hardest truth is,
is that I know,
we know
that this will not be the last great warrior to fall.
And those warriors still on the wine close ranks to fill the void left by the
fallen
and they continue to march forward
into the dark and into the dust looking for and hunting for evil.
And those warriors,
regardless of what they come up against,
they will not stop.
And this evening,
while that punked continues,
while evil lurks out there in the world,
I am lucky enough to have one of the good guys here with me,
the man that wrote those powerful words and that powerful tribute as I said,
a friend and a former seal teammate of mine and he stomps Andy Stumpf.
Welcome to the show brother.
Thanks for having me man.
There was,
um,
that was a gradable piece,
man really was and a fateful rightness.
I think a,
they got around and I hope more people get to hear it now and,
and spread it and share it about that.
You know,
another,
another brave warrior down.
Yeah.
It,
uh,
like we were going back and forth over text.
I think took off like wildfire.
I was eating breakfast with my sons and had received the news from buddy before
it had broken on a mainstream media in.
It was just one of those moments where I couldn't get the thoughts out of my
head.
So I cracked open my laptop,
literally took one stab at that one pass and just hit the post button and walked
away.
Came back four or five hours later and my phone was just exploding.
And uh,
yeah,
I mean it,
it was Cathartic for me to write it and I do hope that more people can
understand the message and take just two seconds out of their day to realize
what's happening all around them,
all around the world at any given time.
And He'd given time.
It's happening.
Yup.
The sacrifices are there and it's,
you know,
speaking of social media,
it's been a lot of people been requesting.
We've been asking,
do you know Andy Stone at Andy Stumpf?
Do you know Jocko?
So yes,
we do know each other.
That is confirmed and they've been asking you to come on the podcast.
So thanks for coming on.
Man.
I know,
I know.
We haven't really seen a bunch of each other in the last few years.
It's been like five years.
That's ridiculous.
And for all those people have been asking,
you can stop now.
The answer is yes.
I know Jocko.
We've known each other for a while and here we are.
Stop.
We're good to go.
Yeah.
But I really appreciate you coming on.
So,
um,
let's get into it,
man.
Let's talk about,
let's talk about you.
You don't give us your basic background,
you know,
tell us about growing up in Santa Cruz wants up Santa Cruz.
Man,
what a great place to grow up.
I mean,
Santa Cruz is amazing with an asterix and that asterix is whether or not at some
point in time in your life you leave Santa Cruz because it's a bubble.
But for me it was awesome.
I have family roots there from not only my father,
but my grandfather.
They had one of the first construction companies.
They're built,
the high school that my father attended,
a built a lot of the infrastructure,
uh,
and also had a lot of ties to like law enforcement and firefighters,
which would help me out when I would get rides home,
when I would get in trouble,
you know,
advantages that other people didn't have.
But I mean,
I consider my,
I mean background is
very generic.
I mean,
I played water polo and baseball in high school.
I'd give myself a C as far as being an athlete,
like very average junior lifeguards,
so comfortable,
uh,
in and around the ocean,
which was a skill that obviously paid off in training.
You can surf.
Did you surf in Santa Cruz?
I did serve quite a bit and I'm sure you've served up there as you know,
is extremely territorial.
Uh,
good waves.
It's good ways,
but like when you're 150 pounds,
you know,
and you're 17,
18 years old and just really wasn't into,
uh,
you know,
fighting for waves.
So at surf a little bit,
a little longboard stuff down by cows,
maybe steamers if it wasn't huge and it just played sports.
Yeah,
I mean it was super casual work for my dad's construction company.
Santa Cruz has a dichotomy to in it,
in the fact that,
especially when you were growing up,
there was mad like,
okay,
there's that basically,
I don't know if you want to call it the haves and have nots,
but we're not talking about money.
We're talking about like massive drug use,
right.
Still exists to this day.
Uh,
and it's,
it's like an undercurrent that not a lot of people know about Santa Cruz.
Most of the people who live in Santa Cruz don't work there.
The money all comes from the Silicon Valley.
They go over the highway 17.
I mean,
the,
the median cost of homes in Santa Cruz I think is near $800,000,
which is crazy because the city was kind of built around Uc Santa Cruz.
I mean,
it's a college,
he was going to afford that stuff.
But in the surfing scene,
I mean,
that's where a lot of the drug,
from my understanding,
that's where a lot of the drug stuff started and then it just pushed itself out.
It still exists.
It's really bad.
It can be,
it can be a rides.
You,
you'd think Santa Cruz is nice beach town,
but it can be a rough town.
I mean,
you make a wrong turn and you're going to be in trouble.
But at the same can be true here of San Diego or anywhere you may want to go.
So when did you hear about when you hear about the teams decide you're going to
get it off?
Yeah.
You know,
uh,
so I come from a military family.
My grandfather was in the navy,
my father was in the navy.
He was a twin 50 cal gunner on the mark ones in Vietnam.
The first squadron,
a patrol boats with the Jacuzzi jets.
What she said had a failure rate of about 90%.
That had to be fun.
And of course they didn't fail at the time that you would want them to pulling
away from the dock while yeah,
no,
just as the middle of a firefight,
you know,
a complex ambush that you're trying to get out of.
Uh,
so you can,
I mean,
I don't think I actually,
I know for a fact my father proud work with seals.
That's,
yeah,
that sounds good too.
That's how I heard about it.
Um,
my father probably didn't want me to join the military.
I mean,
I,
I don't want my son's necessarily to,
however,
I would never stand in their way,
just like my father allowed me to pursue what I wanted to do.
But I started working for him when I was 11 and learn some of the best lessons
in my life with bricks in my hands because he was a mason and I basically moved
to bricks for a long time.
Uh,
but it was hard work and it paid off later in life.
And I remember we were driving back from a job when I was 11 and he mentioned
seals and with no understanding of what they are,
just his description of what they did,
how they he was,
it was like,
you know,
they were in the water,
they would get them the boats,
they drop them off.
It was intriguing to me.
So it led me to trying to search for as much information as I could find out
about them.
And in the early nineties,
the Internet was not what it was today.
So of course I found the book that almost every team guys read the men with
green faces all about Vietnam.
But it's an awesome book.
So I read that and then unfortunately stumbled across the rogue warrior series,
which as I was saying before we started,
I made the mistake of thinking that it was a nonfiction
work.
Didn't find out until a little bit later that that was incorrect.
But I was hooked from that moment on.
It was every piece of information that I could find.
It's all I wanted to do.
It was like a magnetizing force.
Uh,
I don't have the vocabulary to describe it.
People who don't come from our worlds,
it's very uncommon for them to hear that.
But you know,
as well as I do,
the seal teams is full of people with the same narrative.
Oh yeah.
I've just always wanted to do this.
It was a calling.
Uh,
but yeah,
I mean the idea was sparked from my dad and I was 17 still in high school at
junior in high school.
And I went to the navy recruiter and brought the navy recruiter home cause it's
my parents had to sign for me and I had my mom who was an Army Brat and my dad,
who was like I said,
served in Vietnam and I'm sure that they were not extremely excited,
but they both signed for me.
So I enlisted actually when I was a junior in high school and the left just a
few days after high school graduation.
That's so legit.
Yeah,
it was awesome.
And that it's not,
I look back now,
I'm like,
why did I do that?
Why did I enlisted your early,
all I did was give a recruiter,
I filled their quota for the month.
I couldn't lead us.
Like,
yeah,
you've got to still got to wait till I turned 18 and graduate.
But I mean the recruiter was happy.
But I mean I,
I never took the sats.
I had no plan B.
It's what I knew I wanted to do.
And I,
I never even considered,
I enlisted August 1st of [inaudible] 96.
Okay,
awesome.
Yep.
And so then you show up with buds,
showed up for Buds January of [inaudible] 97 and get some winter.
Where still were you still 17?
I was 18.
Yeah.
I got some custom winter class action on
and from Santa Cruz there was not that straight.
Yeah.
I never really laid in the ocean for extended periods of time without a wetsuit.
Uh,
but you know what,
even the training was everything that I thought it was going to be.
I mean,
I was happy to be there
and it hurt every single day and it was extremely hard.
Um,
but God,
I'd pay money.
I'd give you every penny I have right now to go back.
If I could turn back the clock right now,
I would make exactly the same choices up until that point in my life.
Maybe they would change it a little bit later on,
but until that point we're still going down the same.
Yeah.
I had,
somebody asked me that the other day,
some kid,
I was talking to some school kids and one of them said,
you know,
what can I do to get ready for seal training?
I was like,
man,
seal training is awesome.
You get paid,
you work out,
you literally work out all day long.
They feed you three if not four meals a day of all you can eat,
just get after it.
It's,
it's awesome man.
It's so fun with aggressive,
a type motivated,
largely personalities surrounding gill gets better as the obviously the days and
weeks go on and training some of the people who shouldn't be there weeded out.
But yeah,
he,
and then even the teams,
it's like,
it's,
it,
it can be everything that you want it to be.
Yeah.
So you show up,
you,
so you get done,
you show up at the teams,
your new guy.
How's that new guy experience?
Man?
Uh,
I don't know the statute of limitations on some of the things that were done to
me,
but uh,
I mean again,
but it was,
it was awesome.
I was surrounded by my heroes.
I didn't know anything about anything.
Uh,
I didn't realize that at the time.
but I mean your head cause what?
Cause in our heads we know everything about everything.
I in to buzz and airborne school at Fort Benning,
I am the most highly polished soldier in the world.
You just Fyi for those people that don't understand when you get done with buds
and airborne school,
you know nothing,
you know,
nothing tactical,
you know nothing.
And it's pretty ridiculous that,
that it's got the call people call buds at school and I it's,
and again you got to air quote that cause you don't,
you don't know how to be a,
that's another one I get all the time.
You don't,
you're not a seal at the end of buds.
I always tell people it stands for basic underwater demolition seal with the
emphasis on the beat.
It's basic and you can run and do pull ups and you looked great with shorts on
at the beach.
I mean,
but you don't know anything.
Yeah.
So,
yeah,
I mean I checked in,
uh,
you know,
pre nine 11 although they are better now.
I just,
I have to say that forced they're way better now.
I was talking to some guys that recent graduates that are now in the pipeline,
they're getting trained and I told him,
I said,
you guys are getting trained infinitely better than what we got.
Infinitely better now.
It has to do with the timeframe that you and I came in the 90s there was no,
there was few,
very few Vietnam veterans left.
You milk what you could out of them but you weren't going to get like now every
single guy that's teaching every single bloods instructor,
all combat veterans that have experienced.
So it's,
it's a different game now.
They've,
and I figured we were taught infinitely better than the people before us.
I'm glad to see that that cycle repeats itself and then it's just a matter of
technology and understanding and a,
I mean they've changed the pipeline a little bit.
Especially what happens after Bud's.
Yeah.
Cause I went to team five then we did our own tried and board and we did our own
trading.
And then you could talk to the guys like down at team three they're like,
oh yeah,
we didn't do any of that
philosophy.
It just means I'm better than,
you know.
But yeah,
there's no competitive nature of the teams at all.
But I mean it was,
I mean I looked at these guys who had been in seals for like five,
six,
seven,
eight years or there was like a Vietnam vet walking around.
Like you're just,
I just wanted to breathe the same air as those people.
And I mean,
it's a,
you realize incredibly fast that you don't know anything and you realize that
because you get taped up for your mistakes
because you're,
you're reinforced every time that you make a mistake.
And he's just like,
I couldn't do anything right for
like years,
because I didn't know anything the biggest,
if we had been fighting an enemy,
I would have been more of a danger to the people that I was with.
And then the enemy that we were fighting.
It just,
I mean I tell people it takes five to seven years to even understand what it
really means to be a seal.
And then probably at the 10 year mark,
you're at the top of the bell curve as far as what you're going to be able to do
operationally.
But still,
I mean I was in heaven,
I was in my,
I was,
I wasn't even 21 yet.
Living in an apartment in core natto riding a bike
well until I got paid.
Yeah.
That would be the poorest guy.
Two days after that.
It is like for most guys that coming out of high school,
because when you're in high school,
you know,
even if you're working at Wendy's like I did,
you're only making whatever for 25 an hour and that amount.
So you know,
whatever,
you know you're going to get like 80 bucks every two weeks and you,
you show up in the teams and all of a sudden they're giving you real legit
money.
You're filling your pocket of every two weeks.
You are the richest kid in the world,
not a fear new guy.
Cause you're paying for everything.
You buy some beers,
beer.
So learn a lot of stuff in bars,
over beers and learned a lot of,
I mean you listen to a lot of history.
Uh,
you learn a lot about yourself.
You learn when you should keep your mouth shut cause it gets shut for you.
I've been taped up in a bar,
maybe
the uh,
the hazing was pretty good.
And the teams back then reinforcement less than before so you can get a couple
of deployments,
a couple deployments,
nine,
11 deployments.
Uh,
and you know,
again,
the life is a new guys.
Amazing.
Like here's a rifle,
it's yours.
And then my first,
uh,
department,
I worked in with us as secondary calm guy.
So I think I had like a PRC 77
with like rotary,
you know,
rotary dials and whip antenna.
I hadn't even been to comm school,
but it's like this is my stuff.
And I got,
remember going,
getting issued my first set of gear that I look back at it now and it's like I
couldn't sell it if I want it to.
So antiquated.
But I was so happy to be where I was and we,
you know,
he'd trained for 18 months and we'd deploy first six,
but my first deployment was to Japan,
to the Kadena Air Force base and we experimented with how much we could drink
and how much we could work out.
Like which ratio is best 80,
20,
70,
30,
and we'd go train our partner forces.
But I mean we just,
I mean we lived life,
heart,
it was exactly the Brotherhood that I thought it was.
B,
I was surrounded by my best friends.
We all had the same drive.
You could have told us to go build sand castles.
We would have had the best sand castles in the world because we just go and go
and go and go until we get it right surrounded by likeminded,
motivated people.
Come back.
There's another 18 month workup is like a kind of new guy.
One platoon wonder if you will,
if you will.
Again,
you know,
about 20%,
but you think you know about 80,
the ratio is just a skew.
Uh,
went through the whole workup again and then deployed to Guam for six months.
And then at the same time we'd go to Australia for a bit.
We train with the partner forces there.
We'd go to the Thailand's,
we'd go to Philippines and then we'd go back and we'd just train and talk about
how awesome we were going to be when the big mish,
remember the Golden Conex box,
big mission,
the gold car.
Leif and I have talked about that.
You know,
back in the day,
pre,
especially pre nine,
11,
we were all preparing for the one big mission that was going to go down the big
mish.
And you know how,
and what was interesting is because we didn't have any combat experience,
at least from my perspective,
we trained freaking hard because we thought like it was going to be even a
harder than anything we could imagine.
We don't know how hard it's gonna be.
So we're just going to be like,
it's not sandcastles cause we would have prepared for that hard too.
But it's real.
This is what we're prepared for.
So we trained as hard as we possibly could in every area in every arena to be
ready for whatever was going to come,
which we had no idea.
I don't know if I've talked about this before,
but we finally got my first deployment,
my first deployment deployed to Guam.
When I'm ready for the big Mesh Bro.
Totally.
Um,
I'm ready.
It's going down from,
we get there,
we get there and we have,
you know,
we get issued beepers so you know it's real now cause you're getting issued
beepers cause this back in the day.
Then we'll go what had beepers back then unless you,
unless some shit was going to go down.
So they give us the beepers and we're like ready to rock and roll.
And finally,
actually I was surfing and I come in and someone's waving one of my buddies
waving him on the beach and like,
hey I run up.
What's going on?
Hey we got a page.
Should we get the that we have an agent,
we know we get the nine one one page on get to,
but we'd get a call asked to base,
we get there.
We get in,
the LPO is sitting there.
I look at his face and I go,
this doesn't look,
this doesn't look like the kind of face I anticipated seeing right now.
And I've been in Guam,
this is my first appointment.
I'm two days into Guam.
So I think,
man,
this is exactly like where you're,
you're saying that's going to be like,
of course man,
I just got on the boy man,
it's going down.
So Nokia President knows that I'm on deployment.
He's already,
yeah,
we're going to action that target.
So what I failed to mention was that we were like our second or third day and
Guam the first day in Guam that we were there.
We went and cited it in our weapons.
So we got to recall emergency recall nine one one go back into base.
Guess what we didn't do,
we didn't clean up our brass,
so I'm not kidding.
We went and cleaned up our brass they made and they recalled us emergency recall
the go cleaning up our brass on the rage.
After that big,
the beers got cracked open and it went sideways real quick for the rest of that
deployment.
But
isn't it amazing what used to constitute
in an emergency?
That was a,
that was a rough one,
man.
So you end up,
so those are a couple of pre nine,
11 different.
Where were you when September 11th happened?
Uh,
it was a station,
it's a team five still.
And I was living in the Archstone apartments right by Ikea in mission valley.
Watch the second one go in live the,
I remember it,
uh,
it was living with a buddy and uh,
my wife,
we'd been married for
six months and watched the second one go in line.
Wasn't you knew immediately?
Did you know it does,
you think rethinking on the first one,
because I wasn't the first one.
I'm going live,
I turn it on just in time to see the second one.
I,
but I think I caught most people like the first one,
they're like,
oh wow,
that pilots probably in trouble.
We're going to be a lawsuit on that one.
And then the second one,
there was no doubt whatsoever.
And I didn't know,
I mean looking back,
I didn't have the mental capacity to understand the difference that it would
have in my life,
but I knew that something was going to be different.
I mean,
I think I realized that we were passing from the conceptual phase to the
practical phase of what we had trained to do for a really long period of time.
You know,
who didn't know that.
So the deed,
the officer to exotic going to college at the time.
And I called the officer detail or who was a friend of mine who I knew who I'd
worked for,
who is an outstanding guy.
And I called him up and I was like,
Hey sir,
I'm in college.
Get me out of college,
I'll finish online.
I'll do something.
Just get me out of here.
Send me to a team immediately,
please,
please.
And He,
and he says to me,
Jocko,
don't worry,
this war is going to last a long,
long time.
And of course I didn't believe him,
but damn,
was he right?
He was.
But I mean,
I can only imagine being in your shoes.
I would have been like,
I don't really care.
This is what my calling in life is to be.
I don't,
I don't care if I'm in line to get the Nobel prize for something.
Like we'll just put that on the shelf and I'll come back and get it Nobel,
what is a war going on?
And
so you get done with that and then shortly thereafter you ship out to the east
coast,
right?
Yup.
Go out to the east coast and uh,
did the vast majority of my combat deployments out there.
Uh,
and while,
I mean,
what an eye opening experience,
you know it from,
like I said,
going from conceptual shooting paper targets and training heart and realistic
to,
to being on a two way range for the first time.
I mean,
uh,
the,
the first target I ever was on a,
I think my helicopter had 27 rounds in it and the door gunner got shot in the
face right in front of me and I'm in mob level four.
Yeah.
For those of that don't know it back.
And what that is.
That's,
that's the chemical,
biological and radiate,
radiological suit protection that you wear.
And highest level four is you're wearing your mask,
you're wearing everything.
So it's,
it's a horrible,
uncomfortable,
miserable thing to do.
And
we had a four hour 47 flight on the way to the objective and 30 minutes out we
got all of our stuff on to include our gas masks
or the,
I was going to say if you had the blowers,
that does make it a lot nicer.
She puts your weapons strap over the hose.
No,
I could go on for days about mistakes I've made in my life.
Uh,
so yeah,
it was skip breathing and occasionally the glass would touch my eyeball,
couldn't breathe.
But I mean this,
this is my first real target ever and it's,
uh,
we're hitting the number one chem bio target in Iraq.
Uh,
right after the war kicked off and I was on the third 47,
they came in and they blew the power grid.
Uh,
but a tend to strike before we landed.
And then they landed,
the helicopter is in between the fireball and the city.
So we were back lit.
So each subsequent helicopter that came in a took more rounds and by the time
ours came in he started taking rounds.
Is it about a minute out?
I didn't even know what they were.
I'm just sitting there looking through straws,
you know,
through my gas mass,
through my night vision goggles,
suffocating myself cause my weapons strap is over the hose.
It's supposed to be giving me the air.
Uh,
and you know,
there was some sparks,
nobody,
nobody heard on the bird,
not a single one of our guys shot.
And then right before we touched down the door,
gunner just falls over.
And then,
you know,
the top of his head kind of came off and tie my tie my jacket around his head
and it just took off and away we went on our first combat operation.
But the whole thing was just surreal.
And that,
that leap,
I didn't realize how surreal was until the next morning when I woke up and I was
like,
man I hope this is survivable.
Cause that was just one of many in the target deck and it continued for months
and then a years and you know,
two decades now.
Yeah.
And it was,
and it took me a little bit of time to get up and running to be,
to be comfortable in that environment.
But I,
I developed a level of comfort in that environment.
And if I'm being totally honest,
I mean I loved it.
I loved it.
It was,
I mean I understand that it's high consequence and that it's high risk and that
there's,
there's matters of life and death and decisions that are being made,
but that's where I want to be.
I mean that,
I was like,
yes,
this is what I came to do to fight for the values that I believe in and to fight
for people who can't fight for themselves.
And uh,
yeah,
it was awesome.
Loved it.
It's interesting how you talk about that,
um,
transition from like form training,
which is what we all lived.
There's very few people that,
this is another thing that it's hard for people to understand about,
especially about the early days of the seawall.
For us in the early days of the seal teams is there was so few people that
actually had combat experience and that going all the way up to the leadership.
A lot of leadership had no combat experience and so for us,
all of a sudden in a very quick learning curve,
you,
you know,
you spend two weeks on deployment,
you had more combat experience then and you know,
than anybody else in the seal teams at that time.
You know,
other than the guys that were deployed right before you,
but you had to,
that's how quick the learning curve was and things were changing.
I mean,
look at what we trained.
We were doing Otb and exhaustion Draeger dives and I'm doing river and stream
crossing at Niland Bro,
I'm not kidding.
Before my first deployment to Iraq,
I took my seal platoon,
we went on board of an amphibious landing ship in San Diego and when,
and no kidding,
did lead line and slate beach reconnaissance at Camp Pendleton.
That was,
that was less than movies.
It might have been a month and a half before deploying to Iraq to do operations.
That's how,
that's,
that's the lag time in the big bureaucratic machine in the military.
Hey,
you know,
we've got this big a fleet exercise.
You guys are gonna go participate in one of,
one of our,
one of my guys in that platoon,
I come down and go,
hey,
breakout your lead line and states.
So again,
for those of you that don't know,
there's the,
a very prehistoric type operation that was excellent descriptor.
It's war.
They came from World War II.
It came after the battle of,
Whoa,
at the battle of Tarawa,
the marines went in and as they went into the beaches and they're landing craft,
they hit reef and the,
they open the gates of the,
of the,
uh,
landing craft.
The Marines got out and unfortunately the reef ended.
And so he's got these marines went out and they went into,
you know,
10,
12,
15 feet of water instead of two feet of water.
And many,
many marines were draft.
The gear there was not buoyant.
So it was not designed for swimming.
It was,
it was meant for beach landing,
not for a swim.
And anyways,
that was kind of the one of the precursors to the UDTs.
And,
and what,
so what are our predecessors used to do is go in with a lead line,
which is a piece of string with a lead on the bottom of it.
And it's got little marks on it called buntings little marks on it that tell you
how deep it is.
And you go in as a big team and you drop these lead lines and you figured out
how deeply you and your slate is a piece of plexiglass that's been sanded down
and you write with a pencil on it,
how deep it was in this particular location.
So I tried to do calculus with an abacus.
So,
so we are,
you know,
like less than two months from deploying to Iraq for the first time,
none of us had ever been in combat for not one single person,
zero,
not one single person in my soup tune had ever been in combat before,
including our task unit commander,
no one.
And so we say,
Oh,
you know what we need to do right now is we're going to do a hydrographic
reconnaissance.
That's what it's called would lead line.
It's late,
but one,
one of the guys might have to you,
what are you doing?
What are you talking about?
And I go,
Bro,
we're just going to do it.
And it was like,
you gotta be kidding me.
What is wrong with us?
But so that learning curve was fast,
but then it,
but I also too,
to kind of emphasize what you're saying and I look at it when you,
when you said,
do you know your first platoon,
you know,
like 20% and then your second platoon,
for me,
cause I have four kids,
it's very similar to what you learn with kids.
Your first kid,
you're like,
oh wait,
what?
You don't know how to do anything.
Everything is hard.
You know what you're worried about everything.
Your second kid,
you're like,
Oh yeah,
I'm pretty,
we're pretty much going to go your third kid.
You're like,
okay,
you know,
I think we're comfortable.
Your fourth could be like,
I got this whatever the fourth degree,
first kid,
go take care of your siblings.
Exactly.
Which is,
which is really,
which is really exactly what you do.
And the teams are like,
Hey,
you know,
get,
you know one cruise wonder,
go show that new guy.
What's up cause you don't have to do it anymore and you want them to learn the
experience.
But that's the same thing with the combat operations that you do in and over a
period of a couple of weeks,
all of a sudden you go from being,
you know,
out to,
I'll give you another good example from my perspective,
my first deployment to Iraq when every operation we would go on like the first,
like let's call it five or seven operations that I did,
every piece of gear that I had to change the batteries changed the battery,
my not change the battery,
my laser change battery,
my flashlight changed every single bit.
I need a brand new battery in every one of these pieces of gear.
Well I was doing it cause that's,
that's when we talked about the big mission.
That's what we were thinking.
Oh,
what I've,
I got to have this a hundred percent we realized after a week,
if everyone does that,
we're not going to have any batteries left and another two weeks.
And so we all realize,
you know what,
you're going to have to use that battery and keep track of how long you've used
it for.
Cause you don't want it to fail,
but you're going to get,
you know,
12 or 15 or 25 uses out of this thing.
But that's the kind of lessons that we learned.
And that's the kind of comfort level you've got.
Like,
okay,
if my nods fail,
I'll stop.
I'll put a new battery in,
my nods and we'll move on.
So those are the kinds of things that you learn in that steep learning curve
that all of us,
our whole generation went through that real quick.
And you only learn that with time in the saddle.
Like it takes experience to understand like,
okay,
I can use this lithium battery that probably costs $9 and I didn't turn it on
the whole time and I'm going to Huc it.
You know,
I think I can use it again.
I mean,
but I mean everything changed.
The tactics change,
gear changed the way we trained change.
It was amazing what happened post nine 11 all this stuff we thought was going to
be crazy effective cause I've worked in Vietnam.
Guess what doesn't work in the desert.
Let me ask you this,
when you say that you only learn it in the saddle,
when you were,
when you went through training,
when I was,
when I was running training,
did you are able to convey a lot of that information of those guys though?
I tried.
I thought,
I think you were,
and maybe you couldn't give them every single little tiny thing,
but what I'm saying is there was no one to teach us that stuff.
Yes.
In the,
for me it was in 2003 months there was no one to say,
hey,
you don't need to change your battery on every operation.
You're going to need those batteries.
Do you need to make them last?
So we did get,
we did get some fundamental knowledge back from for sure from those early times.
And then you still got to add that experience though,
that people,
I mean like you can't,
you could read a book and then go do it for real and you need the combination of
the two to have that confidence and then you can impart it on somebody else.
And you know,
history just like,
like you said,
the Vietnam guys,
like they were just timed out.
We didn't have access to that.
And I'm not,
I look at the pre nine 11 training that we did,
it was awesome,
but it don't get me wrong,
I loved it,
but man,
it doesn't work in Baghdad.
And then we had a tactical shift again in probably 2006 2007 you know,
it's,
it's just,
it's that I think is what separates our community from a lot of other ones.
Like we're malleable,
but we have,
leadership is like,
listen,
this isn't working in real time.
We need to create a solution for it right now.
And we're willing to do that.
We have just a little bit more control of the wheel.
And I know part of the reason is because we had no doctrine.
Yeah.
Whereas the other service branches,
many of them have this beautiful,
really well written doctrine on this is how you do this type of operation.
And we didn't have that.
So guess what?
For us to say,
you know what,
that didn't work yesterday.
We're going to change it today.
They didn't have that capability.
They were like,
Hey,
this is the way we do it.
And we never really had,
I mean,
thinking about before trade,
I was a team five,
right?
So we would go to Alaska and do cold weather training and the team three guys
were off driving DPV I mean there wasn't even talking in between the teams.
So there was so much skillset and of course,
I mean if you're a team three I wasn't telling you shit,
I can give you the wrong information because we're competing with ourselves.
But yeah,
that,
like you said,
no doctrine.
And then finally we had,
you know the trade at East Coast and west coast and you know sharing information
and coming together and lessons learned and all that stuff that I think largely
professionalize the force from a paperwork perspective but has impact on the
battlefield as well too.
It's not sexy and it's not fun but it keeps people alive.
There's no doubt about that.
The amount of interoperability we would do as the different training departments
was was awesome.
It was awesome and balancing lessons learned and the feedback loop with that we
got going.
One was definitely far superior to anything.
Then like you said,
when we had the teams go in all different areas and not talking to each other,
I mean I got issued over whites at team five would,
they wouldn't issue us Tan BTUs cause we were a southwest Asia platoon and I'd
look at the guys wearing the chocolate shifts.
I'm like,
oh I get a pair of though.
I'll trade you for it is woodland and camp.
It's just a different world.
But I'm actually extremely grateful that I got to see both sides of the coin
because if you never got to see that evolution,
uh,
you're missing a huge piece of who we are as a community.
And also I believe it would be easier that you would,
that we could let it slip back in that direction if we don't,
like we said,
capture those lessons and be able to pass them on.
So how many,
then you got out to the east coast,
how many deployments did you do out there?
Uh,
I bounced back and forth from Iraq to Afghanistan,
uh,
for basically four years straight.
It'd be anything between three to
four months.
They were shorter in duration.
Uh,
so I ended up in my career,
I've been to Iraq three times and Afghanistan five.
And at one point there you kind of got a little setback.
Yeah.
Uh,
I equate it to going to Vegas and you can play craps for a really long time and
you can be on a great heater.
Uh,
and then a seven is going to come up and bite you and hopefully you don't have a
lot of chips on the table.
Um,
yeah,
I got,
uh,
I
got shot from about 15 feet away by a guy in a window that I didn't see and I
was staring at that window for 10 minutes before I,
I was sitting on a ladder looking into a courtyard where they were trying to
determine,
uh,
which building was the one that we were actually going to make entry on.
And they determined that the building that I was looking at was the one we were
going to make entry into actually going to back it up a little bit.
So we walked by this building.
Originally the lights were off cause I was walking point at the time.
So we went down an alley.
Uh,
you know,
we're not always the best and then just,
we made a little bit of noise.
So a guy comes out of a house,
we pursued him into the house and made additional noise while we were doing
that,
uh,
securing that to make sure that,
maybe it wasn't the guy,
we weren't exactly positive of the location,
so maybe that could have been the guy.
So it wasn't,
and we backtracked and went back down that alley.
And uh,
the guys who were doing the,
they were fixing the target,
uh,
trying to determine which building it was going to be.
They needed some time.
So I a ladder up on a wall cause I'm not a huge fan of not being able to see
over things,
climbed up on the ladder and was just looking at the outside of a building and
the lights were on this time,
which defeats a lot of the technological advantage that I have.
So I was kind of just looking underneath my nods and I could see plainly into
the window.
I'd never saw a shadow.
I'd never saw a curtain move.
I'd never saw anything.
And they finally gave me the,
go ahead,
hopped off the ladder.
And I remember being in the corner of the court yard by myself for a little bit
before,
uh,
two other guys came over with me and I almost approached the door on my own,
because I had before and it was dark and I had the shadows and it was kind of
like an American house where there's uh,
uh,
it was like an l the long end of the lb and the garage and then there's that
path that goes to the front door and then it breaks off and then there's that
window right there.
That was the window I was looking at.
I was just going to go to the corner to sit security for the breach and I almost
left the shadows.
I was like,
you know what,
not today.
So waiting for two more guys to come up.
And right at that corner that I was going to post myself up on there was a
window and I wasn't going to turn my back on the window without taking at least
a quick peek in it.
And as soon as I turned my head to look in that window,
I heard a crack and uh,
around,
hit me high up on the hip and spun me.
And then this,
the only time I've ever felt in my life,
the truth,
sensation of time slowing down.
It really it was,
it was almost like the movies.
It's probably the only thing I can say.
It was ever like the movies,
but it's slowed down and spun me towards him.
And when it hit,
I pushed off a little bit with my right foot,
I think just instinctually can,
I kind of pushed me down and there was a vehicle in the driveway and I ended up
stuck underneath the vehicle.
I had a shotgun on my right hand side and the Bungee cord got stuck on the under
carriage.
I'm laying on top of my gun,
can't get at staring at full auto fire from like 15 feet away out of a window.
Guys just up on his knees,
just hosing.
And uh,
probably three seconds occurred or expired.
And I mean,
obviously all hell broke loose from people on our side.
Uh,
engaging the window.
They made entry from the other side,
ended up having,
I think it was eight American servicemen get wounded on that target alone.
Uh,
some of it was,
uh,
our guys were too close to a breach.
I mean,
a lot of it was,
it was some fog of war stuff from a unit that you wouldn't associate necessarily
with the fog of war.
But it,
you know,
it happens.
I associate the fog of war with all the units,
unfortunately.
Yeah.
But you know,
some of them would say it surprises you had some levels more than others.
And it was,
you know,
they were trying,
they wanted to get internal,
they get the breach on the door,
get the breach on the door.
So we put a c six strip charge up,
which is a very large explosive charge that runs the length of the door,
put it on the hinge side.
And when they set it off,
there was a unit that had entered on the other side of the building without
telling anybody standing about three feet from him.
So there were some people who were shot on the inside.
There were some people who were shot on the outside,
and then there were some people who were hurt from the explosion.
So they had little birds coming in and grabbing people.
Uh,
I ended up getting thrown in the back of a Bradley with a Guy Who jab knee with
a 14 gauge needle and hadn't prepped the bag.
So he pulled it back out and I told him at that point,
you're done with any medical treatment at this point.
I will handle my own stuff from here on out.
We're like an army medic.
He was just shaking.
I'm like,
you're good.
I'm going to live.
I think so just take it easy,
take it easy.
But,
uh,
I mean,
I didn't do anything differently that night that I hadn't done before hundreds
of times.
Uh,
you know,
I just,
I was on the wrong side of the bullet and it,
it,
uh,
it actually really rocked my confidence.
It was,
I was young,
I was in my mid twenties where I wanted to be operating at the level that I
wanted to be operating at.
And I mean,
I couldn't walk for almost a year.
I had a Hemiplegia like paralysis of one side of my leg.
I had dropped foot for a year,
obviously hit nerves then they don't know.
They didn't,
I mean they don't know.
It either hit the sciatic nerve as it went through or the shockwave short
short-circuited either way,
the result was the same at Friday at all the way down to,
uh,
my ankle.
So when I was in the back,
when I got to the hospital in the Green Zone,
my biggest complaint was that my ankle felt like it was snapped in half.
Uh,
and like I still have never had a surgery,
never broken a bone.
Everything is still inside of my pelvis.
They just wrapped the wound with ace wrap and drug me out of the compound.
I mean,
that's literally it.
And then they went back to business.
But I thought that I was like,
I had,
my ankle has gotta be destroyed somehow.
So they cut my boot off like very gingerly and they're looking at it.
They're like,
your ankle is totally fine.
But that was by far the worst part of it was the,
the neuropathic issues for like a year and a half,
almost two years.
It felt like my dip,
my leg and gasoline and just lit it on fire 24,
seven.
And so the navy,
I mean I had like 14,
15 pill bottles.
Uh,
I mean I was taken two,
three,
four ambien staying awake.
Of course,
the only way to up that game is to combine with Captain Morgan,
which I in a variety of de dosages.
Uh,
so I would sleep but wake up exhausted.
I mean it was,
it was rough.
It rocked me as a person and as a,
as a seal.
I didn't know if I was ever come back from it.
Where were you stationed at that time?
We still a out on the east coast or did you go to the east coast?
I went to buds,
uh,
as a,
basically a break to rehab myself.
Uh,
I mean like,
so it's even still today,
I can't fell my left leg from the knee cap down.
I roll my ankle all the time.
I'm just used to,
I'm used to it.
I know somehow compensate for it the best again.
Yeah.
I mean,
I'm very,
I don't do any like lateral stuff because if I catch my left foot to the
outside,
that that's the role that I can't stop.
It's the one at the outside.
So I mean,
I still train as hard,
if not harder than I used to.
I'm just super cautious with what it is that I do and I tailor it all towards
the stuff that I do now.
But yeah,
you want to talk about,
you know,
you watch all these movies where you guys are just getting drilled and they're
running at it.
And like,
I'm going to be the biggest warrior ever.
And like I was flat on my back.
I mean,
that was fricking done training.
There's nothing I could do pinned under a car.
Uh,
it needed a buddy of mine to come over and pull me around in the middle of a
firefight to get me out of harms way.
I mean I got super lucky.
The,
uh,
the belt I was wearing that night has the second round that the guy shot at me.
It burned the belt for like two inches.
And then the copper jacket is still in the,
uh,
the belt itself.
That's how close I got to getting hit.
Even higher up in the hip,
like the pelvis.
I don't think I would've survived that one if that would hit me.
Cause there's an AK from like three times the distance from me to you right now.
It was spicy.
So,
so when you,
they're just,
I mean I'm not trying to say anything super negative about the care that you
got,
but they're like,
okay,
take this pill,
take that year.
It was early.
So I was um,
I got home about two days after it happened.
They flew me,
they medivaced me to launch tool.
I decided I didn't want to stay there.
So I checked myself out and got a Delta ticket and flew into New York.
Uh,
it got picked up by another plane and my wife met me at the stairs of the
aircraft,
it in Oceana naval air station there with my son in a stroller and she was
pregnant with our second child.
And about a week after that,
my resting heart rate was sitting at like 150.
I was sweating profusely in a ton of pain and they take me to the hospital and I
remember talking to like this,
I think as an e five at the time.
So I was talking to this little punk,
he to Corman who was checking me in and he was like,
you know,
what's the nature of injury?
And I'm like,
you know,
a gunshot wound to the hip and I kid you not.
He's,
he's like writing this stuff down.
He stops and he looks at me and he goes,
self inflicted.
And my wife's sitting there looking at this.
She's just like,
what's,
what's going on?
Like she has very little understanding of the military medical.
I sat in the waiting room while they took people in with the sniffles and the
flu for four hours before they took me in.
And my wife finally just started losing her mind on them and like,
you know,
they,
it was a training hospital as most military hospitals are.
They had never seen a gunshot wound because it was relatively early in the war,
you know,
given where we were at that time and they wanted to come have all the doctors,
all the residents come in,
they're like,
hey,
can they come in and check out the wound?
Like we'd never seen a gunshot wound.
I'm like,
sure,
if you bring it a pint of morphine with you and juice me up first,
I don't care what you do.
Like,
I just couldn't sleep.
I was in so much pain.
Uh,
the treatment that I got from the military was not awesome.
Um,
it,
it was frustrating at the time,
but this is just to make sure this is oh five oh five early oh five.
It wasn't awesome.
They weren't used to seeing a lot of that stuff.
Uh,
yeah,
I got pills and I got sent home and kind of largely left to my own devices,
which was not a smart call at the time.
Um,
I mean I,
in my career I felt like I was a race car in fifth year,
going around turn four and then somebody dumped the trainee into reverse and
there was just pieces everywhere and I had to kind of put it back together
myself and it sucked at the time.
Um,
my wife's still,
I mean,
she's pissed about it,
the,
the treatment that I got,
but I mean,
I,
the military did what they were doing at that time.
You know,
I don't hold them against it or hold it against them at all.
Uh,
but it sucked for sure.
And I do know we've made vast improved.
You were one of the guys that,
yeah,
the reason why there's been so many improvements,
because you know,
guys were coming back and getting the kind to treatment that they would
definitely deserve better.
You know,
we,
one of the worst things about the whole thing was actually the flight out of
ballade and as c one 41 full of stretchers of people that were wounded far worse
than I was.
Just the noises that were being made on that flight from ballade to Landstuhl.
Uh,
I was very fortunate.
I had a doc who was assigned to me as just like,
hey,
knock me out.
Right?
Like I don't want to hear this anymore.
And I had the guy just basically just juice me up until I fell asleep for the
whole flight.
But what an experience that you'll never forget,
just a tube full of bleeding Americans,
you know,
on their way back to try to put their lives back together and people missing p.
I mean,
I was right next to a guy who was standing in a turret of a Humvee when a
suicide bomber clocked himself off.
And every inch of his body from bell line up was just completely tattered.
I mean,
uh,
another guy who had his legs blown off.
I mean,
like it,
I'm sitting there,
I'm like,
I don't,
okay.
I thought I was injured.
Uh,
you guys,
you guys are way worse off than I am.
It was a very sobering experience.
How did you,
so you go,
you go kind of pretty far down the road of a reason.
Pills.
Okay.
So do you some good recipes if you're interested in three blues of red,
two bottles of Captain Morgan.
How did you,
okay,
well we'll take it for granted that you went pretty far down that road.
Being that you know,
you've got the team guy personality of okay,
I can't do this so I'm going to,
I can't do this to the extreme.
Someone to do something else.
I have to go and stop.
How did you figure out,
okay,
you know what,
what,
what was the slap in the face that made you say,
you know what,
this,
this is not where I want to be.
I was in the car with my wife,
so one of the pills they gave me was Neurontin,
which is a antiseizure medicine for children,
but it has a secondary or tertiary side effects,
side effects of a neuropathic pain control.
It was an attempt to try to get that burning feeling to stop in my leg.
And,
uh,
I kept signing waivers for the dosages cause they were,
we were off the charts,
like we were making medical history with the dosages that I was on.
Uh,
and another side effect of it is central nervous system suppression.
And I remembered going by the gasoline or calm by the gasoline going by the gas
station and looking at the sign for the prices of the gasoline.
And my wife asked me it,
very rudimentary mathematical problem and I couldn't,
I couldn't figure it out.
Uh,
and I'm certainly not the smartest guy in the world,
but like I should be able to add two plus two and,
you know,
maybe multiply that out a little bit.
And I,
I couldn't do it.
And I recognize that in and of myself.
Uh,
so that night I stopped drinking and basically started weaning myself off of the
neurotin cause you can't stop it cold Turkey because if you do,
uh,
your propensity for seizures goes through the roof.
So you ha you got to graduate yourself out of it.
So it took me like six to eight months to get myself off of them.
They're rotten off all the pills.
Uh,
and I just started working out like a maniac and that's how I got myself.
I did it.
I did it all on my own.
I didn't get on any protocol from the navy,
but I remember that moment where I just couldn't answer that question.
I was like,
okay,
Tom did Tom to shift course
and you know,
a lot of people always,
a lot of people ask about,
um,
you know,
when you're injured.
They asked me,
what are you doing?
I always say,
Hey,
I do what I can do.
If I got a blown out knee you normally do,
I'm going to do a one legged squats together ligament do.
Pullups was that your,
your attitude?
And was like,
okay,
what can I do?
You know?
That's,
that's how I found a crossfit was through getting shot.
That's what I use to,
and again,
I could care less than me,
but people get very excited about the term crossfit,
functional training,
whatever you want to call it.
To me,
it was really new at that time.
Like I was on the bodybuilder routine if you know,
chest and Tris and back and buys
nineties team guy,
totally or otherwise known as the echo right.
Wednesdays.
Uh,
but yeah,
so like,
and I had never done the squats before,
so I literally held onto a pole in,
lowered myself down into a squat and I picked myself up and I just,
I just changed stuff so I could do it.
And uh,
I remember the first night of sleep that I had that was really good and my wife
could probably point to it on a calendar because I came back from the gym,
like I had no responsibilities at work because my squadron was still deployed.
So I mean,
I literally was like,
Hey,
come in on Thursdays and we'll give you some east stub on your leg.
Right.
That was,
that was the therapy.
So I went into the gym and I just crushed myself.
Came home,
like covered in sweat and just passed out,
slept good and just continued that routine on.
And,
you know,
they were saying it would take me a couple of years if ever,
to get back on a full active duty because they didn't know.
I mean,
cause with nervous,
they're like,
yeah,
you reached the end of the medical practice when you start talking about nerves.
I've never had,
I mean the doctors with probably a decade of medical experiences saying to me,
Oh,
I don't know.
I'm like,
Hey doc,
I don't have an MD.
And I could tell you that.
I don't know.
Could I get a better answer out of you then that like,
come on man.
Uh,
but yeah,
I mean,
I worked myself back.
I wasn't done.
I didn't want to be done.
And I worked myself back to a point where I felt confident again that I could
deploy and I was still continuing what?
So I left and went to buds in 2006 as an instructor.
Use that time to rehab myself.
And then,
um,
by the time I got to team three,
it was about four,
four or five years after that injury where I was going through training.
When you were the OIC to trade it and,
and also you became an officer at that point when you're going to books.
I did,
I did.
I,
um,
I didn't have,
it's not that I didn't have a choice.
It was the best choice that I had at that time.
So when I got shot,
I was on my Lpo tour.
Uh,
and for people who don't understand the military,
it is a mandatory go no go wicked for advancement.
And they counted it as me not successfully completing it,
so to advance.
So I was in east six at the time and I was trying to walk the less,
sorry for laughing.
I'm an evil bastard cause I'm laughing,
I'm not laughing,
laughing at the old system.
So if you want to March your way from [inaudible] to [inaudible] nine,
you have to hit these mandatory career wickets.
And the jump between East 67 for the enlisted guys is the large jump from middle
management to the c suite of the enlisted realm.
They judge,
you only buy your service record unless you have these mandatory wicked's you're
getting swept off the table.
And so I submitted my chief packages twice with a good,
uh,
awesome evaluations.
I mean,
I was doing some awesome stuff in my career.
I had good words,
uh,
give recommendations,
good evils from everybody.
And two years in a row they were like,
nope.
And so finally I started calling people who probably shouldn't have told me the
answer.
I'm like,
Hey,
what's going on there?
They're like,
oh,
you know,
your Lpo tours getting counted against you.
And I did.
And Yeah,
and I,
and I didn't want to be done with being in the military.
And I'm sitting there and I'm like,
okay,
how,
what can I do here if I want to continue on and I want to have impact?
So I decided I needed to maneuver.
So I researched a officer programs and stumbled across the limited duty officer
program,
which is traditionally for east 78.
And uh,
and there had never been an [inaudible] candidate picked up.
And so I threw my package in the next year that it came up and was actually
selected first out of the whole stable of people that were selected that you're
ahead of like five or six other chiefs,
uh,
who ended up getting picked up for LDL.
But for me it was,
I'm looking at him like,
I want to stay in and I want to have an impact.
This is the only way that I can do it.
So that's why I submitted my,
my officer package.
She was never any burning desire of mine from like years before that.
It was just that I need to do something to keep moving.
And that was my,
that was my route to do it.
Did you,
when you were,
so you get wounded,
right.
And obviously you could have said at that point,
hey,
you know what,
I'm done.
You know,
when you look at the various reasons that a person could choose from,
why you said like,
you know what,
I'm not done.
Because the friends that,
you know,
other guys that we both know that I've talked to,
they have,
you know,
various reasons.
Some of them are straight up vengeance like,
oh,
I'm going to go back and I'm going to get after it.
These people are going to pay some of it.
Hey,
I for myself,
you know,
kind of like what you were saying,
like I,
I feel like I,
I,
I can't do what I am supposed to do,
so I want to prove that I can go back and do it.
What,
what,
what was like the driving reason for you if you have,
if you had to pick one,
maybe there's just all those things,
which is a perfectly acceptable answer too.
I mean,
vengeance is certainly a part of it,
right?
Like,
how dare you,
I'm the only one who gets to do that to people.
Uh,
you know?
Yeah.
What a crazy,
a crazy thing to think like that.
But you kind of do like you think you're invincible.
Right.
And so I needed to prove to myself that I could still do the job that I wanted
to do.
I was pissed about it and I was at a point in my life where I was still very
tied to what the job meant.
I derived so much of my personality and who I was from that job because it was
all that I had focused on for the vast majority of my life at that point that I
didn't,
I didn't know who I would be without that.
So it was a combination of all of those things that just kind of kept driving me
towards going back.
And there was,
I mean there was never a second's hesitation.
I like,
I knew I was going to not stop.
I just didn't know that the road,
the road with which I was going to take to not stop.
You know what's weird too is that,
you know,
for guys that like you and I that are full on institutionalized in the military,
it's almost like the,
when I was in,
I didn't understand other options.
Like it wasn't like,
well I could do this.
Like right now we can sit back.
You know,
Andy,
you could have gotten out back then and you could have gone into it.
It's so clear to see that.
No,
but when you're in you're just,
no,
well if you can't do this well then there's nothing else that you actually can
do.
This is the only option in the world.
And if we're being totally honest,
a lot of that is by design.
I'm sure it is
military and especially the seal teams.
What did we do to our buddies
who want to get out?
You know,
like I am thinking about getting out,
hey,
fuck you quitter,
quitter.
But I mean like we,
I mean we're the most,
I did 20 years of,
one of my buddies was like,
I said,
hey man.
Yeah.
Like at the 18 year mark,
I told one of my close friends,
I'm like,
yeah,
I'm Adam.
I'm going to retire at 20 they're like quick quitter.
I'm thinking about in the training from day one it's about the guy to your left
and right,
right,
and then you get back from a mission,
you take care of the team gear first.
You know the last thing you do is you take care of yourself.
So were you are the bottom of the priority list priority list life is the bottom
of the priority list and the CEO came and that has secondary and tertiary
effects when it comes to understanding what you can do or options that you would
have outside of the military.
I'm not saying they do it by design,
but the system that we come from naturally puts on a set of blinders,
which I think is essential to make us as effective as we are.
You're right,
I think,
I think it is a complete secondary effect.
It's not like there's some evil training person in the sky that's going,
okay,
the way we can get these guys to stay in.
It's do this.
No.
The way that the seal teams has evolved to be the best we can be in combat is to
make this thing your number one priority.
Which I say that all the time.
I got asked this the other day,
I was out doing uh,
uh,
working with a company and you know,
some guy who was asking me,
how did you do your work life balance when you're in the seal teams?
And I'm like,
no,
this isn't the answer I shouldn't be giving.
I'm not authorized.
The only,
you know what you do,
you marry an awesome girl.
Yep.
And then you focus on your job.
That's what I did.
I married an awesome girl and I focused on my job and my wife knew.
She knew.
It wasn't like I covered up and said,
no,
no babe,
you're my number one priority.
It was like,
no,
no.
The,
the teams and then the teams and then the teams and then everything.
Then like Jujitsu and then everything else.
And then you're down here.
That's the way it is.
And I'm not trying to be an asshole.
That's the,
that's the reality of the situation.
And that's why,
yeah,
it's uh,
that's,
that's why another reason why when,
when guys get wounded and they go,
yeah,
well what else are you going to do?
Yeah,
so you get to team three w what was your position when you,
by the way,
so just so people understand that this LDO thing,
which by the way,
I don't know if you've known this,
but it's completely gone.
It's shut it down.
They shut it down.
It's one of the,
if not the only way to get commission without a college degree.
I'm working on a high school diploma here.
People public school education,
barely in Santa Cruz.
But you showed up and like to this day,
right at this moment in time I had,
and I was quote unquote running the training.
I have no idea what your job actually was.
How awesome is that?
That is pretty awesome.
Well done.
But you know,
I know I could tell you exactly what role you fulfilled,
you know,
as a leader,
but I don't know where you would have broken out on an org chart.
What was your actual officer for a task unit for the seal team?
Three in general.
You were running around with a machine gun during workup because they would've
failed their,
oh,
Ari.
I mean the platoons would count or like,
you know,
uh,
the sea would be like,
Hey,
uh,
we failed land warfare where you come out to not live with us for the or.
I'm like,
absolutely,
I'll come out and swing blanks.
And like,
I mean,
for one,
like I,
I have,
I never wanted a desk job.
I loved best job in the seal teams.
And you know,
this is an e five shooter.
Absolutely.
My first combat deployment,
my responsibility was a sledgehammer.
Then I moved up to the Hooli and then I moved to a shotgun and then I could do
whatever I wanted to do and it was the best job in the world.
And like I,
that's all I wanted to do.
So although I was an officer to be,
by the way,
you get to be a master with a slight or a master with a hooligan tool.
Yeah.
You just become,
it's your life precise,
efficient.
Uh,
and so the,
you know,
like I put my officer package in,
but let's say like 20% of me,
it was like,
you know what?
This is just a means to an end.
I'm going to figure out a way to get back on the battlefield because LDLs are
not supposed to be tactical leaders at all.
You're a line officer,
but I should have never been.
Well,
I should have never been by the letter of the law of the Ldo manual in a
tactical leadership position,
which I eventually worked my way to not buy any kind of design.
But I went to team three training hill and you know,
they're getting ready to send people to Afghanistan and no one's ever set foot
there.
And you know this,
the skipper wanted to send me there and then the troop commander had a great
relationship with and they were short and officer here and there.
So I'd like,
oh,
maybe I'll just go out to San Clemente island for a little bit,
you know,
maybe I'll get on the roof and throw some grenades in the window.
It's hard to say what I'm going to do.
And so I just like just kind of started going out there again and then like went
out to an island when they,
when the,
the troop failed their land warfare.
I went out with them and try just to try to go and do smart stuff to help them
out to relieve some,
give the leadership some distance in space.
Yeah.
And it was awesome.
I mean it's awesome when guys that were experienced were come through like
yourself,
which is so good to have guys like you come through,
especially because you were,
you were super experienced,
really good tactically and super humble.
It wasn't like you were out there like,
no,
you were like,
oh,
this is awesome.
Training.
Looks like,
Oh yeah,
this,
hey,
we need to do this.
It was just,
just so good for the troop to see that type of leadership out there.
Plus I like offensive maneuvers and what I'm telling guys to move forward.
They're like,
oh,
we can do that.
I'm like,
Oh yeah,
Oh yes,
we can do that.
And you should.
And they,
and they just,
they weren't because that,
you know,
you get a junior officer in a community full of a types and most of the people
that work for them have more experience than them.
They're hesitant to make a call because we eat our own cause when did the most
voracious community ever,
so they're afraid to make an offensive call when they should make an offensive
call.
Like ever.
I've heard you say before,
and I know we have the same position,
like the default move should be aggressive,
drive forward,
not away like putting your enemy on their heels.
You don't need to be on your heels at all.
Like take their space and time away to make a decision.
Shorten their short and your Ooda loop and get in the middle of theirs and just
start wreaking havoc.
But you got to have,
again,
time in the saddle to be comfortable making those calls.
And a lot of it I noticed was pattern recognition.
Like,
Oh,
I've seen this a high grounds over there.
Sure,
let's get some guys over there.
Hey,
they're going to come around this building.
Don't ask,
just don't,
don't ask me now.
Just get over there.
Go over there please.
Like you can see it's pattern recognition from time in the saddle.
And because I was exposed awesome people throughout my career and I watched him
and I wrote down what they did and I just have always tried to be a sponge.
You have to be a sponge and suck up knowledge.
And so then you,
you do another deployment and you do end up in a leadership position.
Yeah.
Which again,
good job.
You said it was,
what'd you just say?
It was unintended or something like that was relatively unintended.
Relatively quantified it now thank you.
Because I was going to have to call bullshit,
you know?
Uh,
so I went through the last,
you know,
the troop commander from that troop was like,
hey,
we're,
you're going to come over.
I was supposed to be the OP.
So on that deployment at a fire base that was in between the two platoons,
one of the officers was having a kid,
he wanted to stay back for about the first month,
month and a half.
And so they had no AOAC minted oh one at this point.
Freshy butter bar.
But one of my favorite things to do,
a totally an aside,
was to put my cammies on with my butter bars and I'd go to the ops meetings over
at group and I'd let like a e six is an e seven it's like talk to me like this
brand new.
Yeah.
Cause I always,
I mean I've looked relatively young and they're like,
you know,
later on once you got something,
you know
time mean these guys are actually guys that you would probably or in many cases
had been in the team longer than oh for sure.
Yeah,
100% and I'd be like,
Huh,
tell me more.
And you're like,
and then I'd catch him later on in my Khakis and they're like,
ah,
I got to admit I had some phones as butter bar as well.
I got her admit.
Oh that's awesome.
Thank you so much for the guidance.
I hope one day I know as much as you do.
And they're just like,
yet I told them,
I told the,
I told the chief or senior chief,
actually that was kind of calling me out like butter bar at when I was at team
too.
And I was telling him in front of my platoons there and they all,
they all knew me and I go,
well,
you know,
senior you got to,
you got to understand ensigns run the navy.
And he,
he used the width.
You can see I'm turning red instantaneously into orbit the orbit.
And he actually said,
you know,
you guys need to straighten this inside and out.
And I said,
hey,
why don't you do it?
I'll meet you out the mill.
Vance,
let's call it new and I'll be out there to warm enough.
You'll be out by yourself.
Oh,
that was so good.
Yeah.
So
you know,
the,
the true commander was like,
Hey,
do the last month to training with us,
which was the San Clemente Block.
Uh,
so went out there with the snake many block.
the skipper was like,
hey,
go over there as the op,
so,
but we're going to slide you out with this platoon.
Were having some potential leadership issues with the OIC,
a man that I know you're familiar with because we experienced them largely
together.
Uh,
and I think,
I think,
and this is me speaking for why I think he did that.
I think he did me,
he put me out there as a,
as a safety mechanism.
I don't know.
I don't think he had anything else to do.
Uh,
so I went out there and uh,
he ended up being relieved and then,
uh,
the skipper,
because mean I was an o one wearing oh three a and o four one Scott wasn't
paying attention because I would just take his collar devices often cause or
whatever.
It's not like I'm an o three either.
So I would just put on whatever color device I could get my hands on.
And there was no colonel bars available.
Oh,
I didn't wear it if I couldn't find some general stores that had been rock in
those things.
And,
uh,
I mean it was one of the best deployments of all the stuff that I did a while I
was in.
I think what I was the proudest of is a lot of the guys I deployed with for
people that I had put through buds and to see them overseas on their first
deployment.
Uh,
and the only word for it is,
is afraid to do something because of the consequences.
You know,
there's,
as you know,
there's a lot of oversight.
If you pull the trigger on somebody,
you had better be able to articulate why you did that.
Uh,
you need to be able to conduct yourself over the radio.
You have to be able to paint the picture.
There's a correct way to brief.
There's the ways that,
you know,
you got to play,
mental judo and interacting with people.
And to see these young guys who had no experience and afraid too afraid is not
probably the best word,
but hesitant to make decisions.
And then at the end of the deployment,
just sharp teeth out knowing what they need to do.
And I can just sit back and it's not,
and again,
that that's a lot of that is them getting that experience.
But I was just glad that I was able to be there to provide that buffer because I
wasn't gonna let anything happen while I was out there.
To the best of my ability.
Like I always picked the most dangerous place to be.
I always wanted to be in a position where there's going to be a decision to be
made like that.
That's just the way that I want to be.
Like where's the most dangerous place to be?
Where's the most optimal place to be put me in coach,
I'm going to be right here.
And then to try to teach other people to do that exact same thing and then to
step back.
That to me is probably what I'm the most proud of is the growth of the people
that I was.
You know,
you talk about that mental judo thing,
which again,
this is the one that's going to be hard for civilians to understand how much,
you know,
it's like a bureaucratic force that exists in the military and really you have
to be,
you have to be able to,
to navigate through that.
And that was,
that was the thing for me that I always look back and I go,
I wish I would've done a better job of teaching that
to guys because I had no problem teaching them the tactical side of things.
And then if I really was close with someone or really spent some time with them,
I'd be able to get through the rest of it and say like,
okay,
by the way,
this is how you have to do this,
this is a,
this is how you have to walk this line,
this is what you have to say in these situations.
And they'd be great.
But some guys would catch,
like some guys would catch the,
uh,
the,
the surface Jocko,
right.
Just like the surface Jocko,
which is like you're old,
right?
Which is,
which is awesome.
Right.
That's absolutely part of,
uh,
part of it.
Right?
But guys that only caught the surface,
Jocko,
sometimes they get caught up later because they'd say,
you know,
Oh,
this guy was,
uh,
this guy was Pino risk averse.
I'm like,
oh well,
you know,
here's what you got to do when you got a guy that's where his commercial or this
guy's Nico Model,
here's what you got to do.
And he's got a handle them.
So that's something that when I had the opportunity and the time,
but that thing,
the other thing about it is there's no,
there's no training for that.
That's just,
I was just going to,
being in the saddle like that is,
there is no one that says,
and it's hard to even simulate because that means you've got to stimulate some
other human beings rank and characteristics and personality through your
deployment.
I might change halfway through your briefing.
You know,
you can brief a guy that's all in a good mood and all of a sudden he turns,
cause he saw that you said something that you got to learn how to deal with
that.
And that political side of,
that's what it is.
Basically it's political and it's relationships.
Building those things up that is so key.
And once you get into the leadership position,
I hate to say this,
I hate to say it,
once you're in the leadership position,
that is at least as important as what you're going to do tactically.
I mean the seal teams have made their mark kinetically,
but we get our go.
No,
go off of PowerPoint.
Absolutely.
I mean that's the,
I've had briefs come back because the helicopter was facing the wrong way on the
insertion slide.
I've almost gotten into fist fights.
I'm like,
listen,
it's Helvetica 12 not 11 we're not two in times.
New Roman shit now.
All right.
[inaudible] get out of my face with that times new Roman son,
the battlespace commander said it's Helvetica bold sometimes only on the exfil
slide.
But like,
I mean,
it's insane.
Like we,
we have,
we can bring some of the most amazing combat power to bear,
but only if the leadership can articulate and navigate what the battle space
owner wants.
Cause we don't make sense to a lot of people who don't come from our background.
And you gotta learn,
you gotta learn to read what they're saying and speak their language and then
you just,
you gotta maneuver.
I mean that's the biggest thing is you gotta maneuver and then then you can be
so wildly effective.
It doesn't matter how good you are tactically.
If you can't get outside of the wire.
I mean,
and it's truly,
if I tell people this all the time,
you want to shut down the seal teams,
kill Microsoft Office.
We're done.
Yeah.
The whole military is actually very,
you know,
it is a bureaucracy.
You said it's kind of a bureaucracy.
It is the biggest,
I mean it's 100% bureaucratic.
I mean it's amazing.
And as an e five you're like,
I just,
I just want to go jam my mags up and then make them empty.
And you're like,
yeah,
that's awesome.
I'm going to be up for 12 hours looking for the appropriate helicopter icon and
I may get Sassy and have it move in with helicopter noise is,
it depends.
And then you got to be able to brief it,
right?
Cause then there's a whole other skill,
like I'm,
I don't know how many times you have to go and not only present the brief but
like talk to the guy who's going to say yes or no and develop that relationship
and you're selling your operation
until you get that relationship where they're coming to you and saying,
Hey,
this,
which is the best possible case.
And I was blessed to band up in that situation where it was just a total mind
meld of a,
whatever you guys want to do,
what can you do here?
Can you,
that's when you,
that's when you just are loving life and it doesn't get any better than that.
Good Times with PowerPoint.
Oh my God,
you've got,
you can hit the control key and the Arrow,
it only moves a little bit.
Need to move that just to get it centered.
I know so much about PowerPoint that I could never forget if I wanted to.
It's so horrible.
You,
so that was a,
that was an awesome to prelim it though.
It was awesome for different reasons.
I mean,
don't get me wrong,
I w w as an o one was caring generally my 301 bag and to javelin missiles to
high ground positions and coming back with them all empty the majority of the
time.
So I got to have,
yes,
that does go in the boxes.
I got to have a,
a bit of what we'll call a hoot and then,
but again,
professionally developing for me too,
because I didn't have any experience being an op.
So for a task unit and you wanna talk about relationship stuff,
the sometimes,
you know,
the base that we were on,
I just developed a relationship with there and three or s three and ended up,
I was selling myself.
We had a great relationship.
I could come to him the day before be like,
hey,
we're looking to do.
And they see,
he's like,
Yep,
no problem.
Let me know what's lineup a QRF.
And it just,
it's so much
pulling.
The trigger is easy.
All the stuff you gotta do to get to that point is so hard and it just doesn't
make the movies cause it's boring.
Yeah,
no,
there's,
there will,
there will literally never be a movie or a book about that crap.
Why can't we have a movie about a 72 hour planning cycle?
I don't understand where's the three meter imagery?
God dammit,
this is five.
I heard one of my platoon commanders,
not life,
the other big Delta platoon commander was telling someone and he goes,
he goes,
you know,
someone was like,
Oh yeah,
you guys got to me.
And he said,
Joe,
I watched Jocko literally beat his head up against a wall for every single
operation that we did.
I was like,
Oh damn.
And that wasn't the conventional side.
Yeah.
That was beaten up against.
There was,
you know,
it was our chain of command,
which is very,
um,
which can be very micro focused on little things from time to time.
Occasionally you get the broad spectrum of leadership inside of the teams.
Not all of it is good,
but you,
whichever,
whichever game
you gotta play,
that's what you got to play.
And that's exactly what I did.
And that's,
you know,
that's why I always say that had the same relationship with every boss I've ever
have,
no matter who they were and what,
how crazy they were or how awesome they were.
They trusted me and they were going to give me what I needed to do my job.
So that was your last appointment then?
It was,
and then you went to trade at trade at and I was gone
check.
I got there in August of 2010.
Yep.
I was while I,
I think the last time I literally saw you before today was in the hallway right
by your old office.
You were walking out and I was coming back from deployment and we're like,
yeah.
So like five years ago,
it's no big deal.
Actually seven years ago.
Did you do there?
Uh,
it was the opposite I think.
I mean,
did you get to go out at all?
I didn't do anything.
I augmented the leap frogs.
Um,
I'm not,
I would die.
I don't do good when it comes.
I mean,
I did my job,
but like I'm not a paperwork,
you know,
Ninja that hall in,
nor is there really,
it's not really an op so much like the trade,
that guy is not the CEO.
He's the OIC.
So a lot of those positions,
there's redundancy.
There was a training warrant.
Oh.
So it's fairly repetitive.
So there's not like an ad,
a team with the first time you're going to go through this and now it's
everything.
Did you get through two or three cycles and it's like,
okay,
you could put this thing on autopilot.
It's the same thing every three,
six months,
whatever it is.
So I got medically retired,
uh,
I was going to just get out of the military.
Uh,
I came back from that deployment and that was talking to,
uh,
the officer detailer about what I would need to do to continue my career.
And she said,
well,
you know,
since you haven't done your AOC or your OIC to,
or what we're going to need you to do is to back to back AOSC.
Oh,
I see.
Then you're going to do your,
you know,
your disassociated tour.
I'm just like,
we,
we can stop right now.
Like,
my wife's not going to tolerate that.
Like I think she's at the vast limit.
I was at the limit my body,
like my ankle,
I almost had to medivac myself out a couple of times,
like roll my ankle extremely bad on a,
on an offset patrol in like laying on target with my foot up in the year.
It was just,
I was,
I recognize it like my time was over.
Uh,
so I researched what it would take for me to stay in and continue and it was not
tenable.
So I was just going to get out of the military and I was five days from my
separation date and went to go get my physical and the doc's like,
no,
I'm not signing this right on.
Good for him.
Uh,
they extended me a year.
I mean,
I had to go,
I went out to Nico and uh,
but as the did that,
as far as the kind of the horsepower for the writeup,
I've got the whole full assessment done and ended up getting medically retired,
which was a huge benefit to myself all thanks to that doc who was like,
no,
I'm not,
I'm not going to sign this.
Yeah,
that is awesome.
And there's plenty of team guys that,
you know,
spend their entire career.
I'm not going to the doctor.
I'm not going to do.
And that's another thing that gets conditioned into you going through basic seal
training,
which is don't go to medical no matter what.
Why wasn't the same way?
Even after getting shot,
my medical record was thin and you know,
I was going through the questionnaire and the interview at the actual discharge
to physical and he's like,
what?
Like you couldn't find any of the documentation.
And then I left Nike with like 300 pages.
Uh,
maybe if you read that thing,
it's like this guy will never,
I should be in a wheelchair right now with a straw.
Like you read that thing and I'm like,
oh my gosh.
Uh,
and then you get away to do bureaucracy,
submit a package to the MED board,
and six months later they're like,
okay,
you're out.
And that was it.
That was it.
No retirement ceremony.
I just was like,
Hey,
uh,
went in,
talked to the OIC.
I was like,
Hey,
um,
it's almost lunch time.
I'm going to leave now and I'm,
I'm never going to come.
How many years was that for you?
One month shy of 17.
Yeah.
And so I literally went in,
I was like,
hey,
it's almost lunch.
I'm leaving.
I'm not going to come back.
And he's like,
all right,
cool.
See you later.
I had some terminal leave saved up at like 90 days worth and I just gone,
never went back in.
I think I went and got my dd two 14 or like my retirement id card like a year
later.
Yeah.
It just never went back.
It's crazy.
It's crazy how you do that time and then it's over like that.
And in a blink of an eye,
I remember that I was all big.
Did the retirement ceremony did that,
came back all my,
the rest of my gear,
which was all packed up in my drawing cage,
went up,
grabbed it,
pulled in the back,
throw it in the back of my van,
drived out the gate.
That was it.
Yup.
No more.
Yeah.
I just gone,
that's it.
Don't,
never do never to be back.
20 years done.
Yup.
It's bizarre.
So then you get into the afterlife.
Indeed.
What's that been like?
So what,
what year did you,
what year was that that you retired?
I got retired the last day of June,
2013.
Okay.
So I'm coming up on a this year,
it'll be four years.
Uh,
I had,
fortunately I was kind of double dipping on weekends.
I had a job that I was doing on the weekends,
so I transitioned to doing that full time.
Uh,
and I dabbled in a lot of stuff.
I mean I got 3,500 hours of flight time.
I typed,
rated in a Gulf stream jet,
the citation five 25 jet,
which gets me like five other jets.
I could fly.
I did.
Uh,
when did you rack up all those hours?
What I do on my weekends is not know the business of the navy.
I flew hard.
I mean,
I was just flying a ton.
Uh,
I got my pilot's license on my own when I was in,
and then all the rest of the licenses came in the two to three years after,
after I was in.
But I was just,
was cranking out hours.
I had a company that I was working for that was paying for all the training so I
could fly as much as I wanted to.
So I dove in to the bucket both feet.
Uh,
I did charter flying for a bit.
I mean I was managing licensing and sponsorship deals for an organization and it
just,
everything kind of just morphed.
I left that organization,
got back into teaching,
uh,
military guys a little bit on the jump side of the house.
I've been passionate about jumping ever since the first of that.
I did come,
he jumps you over.
I know,
uh,
just over 6,000,
which seems like a lot until he guys that have 29,000,
I jumped at Scott at San Diego all the time.
And if you work in the sport for any period of time,
you'll be at 10,
15,
20,000.
It's not,
it's not uncommon,
but in the military it's just,
that's the school bus to get to work.
So it's an ancillary skill set at best.
So I couldn't pursue it until I got out,
but I,
uh,
when I got,
it was hard for me when I got out,
if I'm being honest.
Um,
I got to a point where I couldn't watch the news anymore.
You know,
2013,
all of the ground in Iraq,
that was sweat and blood and tears.
If people that we know to gain with being eroded,
and I describe it like watching the tide go out an inch at a time until all of a
sudden it's gone.
And I used to make the news and now I'm sitting here on the couch watching it
and I had to turn it off and it,
and I really struggled with finding something that I thought mattered and it's,
it's,
it was tough for me.
I didn't think a lot about what I was going to do when I was out,
when I was in for reasons that we,
we kind of already talked about.
It's a natural path that you take when you're in a,
but it took me like a year and a half to really get my head on straight and
figure out what it is that I want to do.
I still don't even know how I'm going to do it,
uh,
but I know that I want to make a difference.
I want to do,
I want to make this country a better place than it is right now.
I want to take the awesome stuff that I was exposed to when I was in the teams,
from the people that I was fortunate to be surrounded by and,
and make people better with that information.
How I'm going to do that.
I don't know,
but that's kind of the circular path that I'm on.
Like half of my year,
the other half,
I just dress up in a squirrel suit and jump out of airplanes and off of cliffs,
which is nice.
It doesn't suck.
I'm not going to do it forever though.
I,
and then I look at it as something that's enriching for me and empowering for
me.
But,
uh,
there's a,
there's a timeline for how long I could do it.
I mean,
I'm a bad landing away from not being able to jump anymore.
And I,
and I take it very seriously.
I have a very structured training protocol.
I don't let myself get out of currency,
whether it be jumping or packing parachutes or,
I mean,
I treat it like a military operation.
It doesn't make it safer for me.
But I tried to pay attention more than anybody else who was around me.
And my goal was to never be surprised.
Like,
I don't ever,
I want to understand what's coming and I,
and I don't like,
and it happens.
Occasionally you'll,
you'll jump off of a cliff or you're jumping out of an airplane or something
will happen that surprises you.
And I try to avoid that at all costs because I find that,
you know,
that's when the catastrophic stuff can occur,
but it's a,
you got to find the next step.
I mean,
you and I both know people who derive their entire identity from what they used
to do and it's tough to sit back and watch them not be able to depart from that
because he becomes,
it's self destructive.
Yeah.
Because it doesn't last forever.
It can't last forever.
I mean,
you're renting your tried and it's not yours.
You're at best you can move the marker in the seal teams,
hopefully in the right direction.
Maybe leave a little bit of legacy if you did.
You know,
the legacy that you should leave is making it better than when you got there.
But that's the best you can do.
And then you've got to put it away.
Even if you did 20 years,
what's the average lifespan of an American?
You got some time left and the military retirement check,
it's not massive,
so you're going to need another job.
Uh,
but what I needed,
I needed a purpose and that's where I started doing,
you know,
fundraising for the seal foundation.
That to me was huge.
Teaching the military guys,
goose kind of felt like I had not a foot in the fight,
but I had some impact again.
And just trying to shorten their learning curve.
Uh,
cause they expect these guys to know so much stuff that if you could just
shorten their learning curve and give him,
I'll give you a little bit of space to breathe,
you know,
to take the stress off.
And that's those real,
yeah,
like that stuff is real.
And when you,
when you impart that knowledge on young guys,
it is real.
When you make that learning curve shorter and steeper and faster,
that is real.
That has a real impact on those,
on those kids to go out there.
And it's those little lessons that they learned.
And I,
I mean I,
I still hear that from guys that come back and,
and they said,
Yep,
yeah,
we need this cover move.
You know?
I'm like,
yes,
I'm so happy to hear that.
Cause I know it's kind of like the early days of Jujitsu in the fact that we
didn't really,
in the early days of Jujitsu,
there wasn't as much knowledge as there is now.
And now the first three days you go to Jujitsu,
you're going to learn about under hooks,
you're going to learn about body position,
you're going to learn about hip movement.
I didn't learn,
no one taught me that stuff back back the duty.
No one,
no one taught you that stuff.
You just had to figure it out.
And if somebody teaches it to you,
it's like you take a quantum leap.
And it's the same thing with the guys that are in the military and they can get
that quantum leap just by saying,
Oh,
here's a perspective of leadership that it took me Jack Ass Jocko,
you know,
14 years and screwing up a bunch of things to go,
oh,
this is what you need to do in these situations.
So to be able to say,
look,
you don't need to be the jackass and I was,
all you need to do is know this little bit tidbit right here in this whole thing
over here.
Yeah.
And that definitely has a,
has a huge impact on those guys.
And it's,
it is awesome to feel that.
Yeah.
When he makes him better learning the other stuff because they're less stressed
out,
they have a better understanding and it's just,
and like 90% of this stuff I teach,
I'm like,
listen,
it's pattern recognition.
I saw this so many times,
then I did this and it defeated that.
So just do this.
Just trust me and do this and you'll be better.
And then they do and they're like,
oh wow,
that was awesome.
Like,
yeah,
I know.
That's why I told you.
How about the,
uh,
you talk about the foundation.
Yeah.
What are you doing?
Tell us a little bit about the foundation and how if people want to support the
foundation,
what's the best way to get that done?
Yeah.
Uh,
so obviously they're,
I think they're,
the last stat I heard,
there was 40,000 service based organizations that help people peripheral to the
military.
So there's a variety of choices and if you're from an army family,
awesome,
go support and army charity,
right?
I obviously have a close DNA tie to seals.
So,
uh,
a buddy of mine recommended,
trying some stuff,
skydiving and the sky diving world to try to drive attention to fundraise for
the seal foundation because just like I've never had,
I think a unique thought in my entire life.
I swear that every idea I've ever had came from somebody else.
It was like this one was his.
Uh,
but to me that was the link to finding a purpose again because I realized that,
okay,
my,
my days of putting my toes on the line or over,
but there will always be people with their toes on the line.
And the next best step is let's create a buffer for the families to step in.
Because,
I mean,
you've seen it.
It's a,
I,
the knock on the door is a tornado wrapped inside of a tsunami with a hurricane
at the same time and it is destructive.
So let's try to do something that helps the families.
Uh,
and that's what the seal foundation does.
Everything from educational support to legacy preservation,
uh,
and everything in between.
I mean,
you can go,
the navy seal foundation has an awesome website.
Uh,
and there's people who do go fund me is,
which is what I did or go to the foundation and donate directly.
Cause I mean there,
you can look at their rating as well too.
It's like 96 cents at every buck goes to what they espouse.
It's going to go to,
it's awesome.
Like it's a great foundation.
Uh,
yeah.
Do some research on and get involved and skip a latte one day,
you know,
donate five bucks and it goes to,
it goes to a good,
it goes to a good cause.
Uh,
I've been into some houses where kids are getting raised by a memory of a father
and a picture of her fireplace and no money will ever replace that,
but maybe we'll make their life a little bit easier.
No doubt about that.
What was the,
what was the record you are going after a yes.
He completely arbitrary distance lateral measurement of distance in a wingsuit.
So I,
that was the idea where all good ideas start,
which was in a bar over a cocktail and buddy was like,
hey man,
you should go try to set a world record in your wing suit.
I'm like,
well if I don't even own one yet,
so what are you talking about?
I'll do it of course.
But like what's the record?
I was like,
if,
I mean,
yeah,
obviously crush it,
but what is it exactly again and where do I get one of those?
Uh,
and it was trying to set the furthest distance,
our farthest distance,
sorry,
the farthest distance flown in a wingsuit.
So,
uh,
bought a wingsuit and after jumping it for less than a year,
which I don't recommend to anybody to do this ever,
uh,
I got hooked up with a really good mentor.
The Guy who actually taught me how to base jump,
taught me how to fly the suit and we went up to Davis,
California and I jumped out of a caravan at 36,500 feet,
got into a lovely spin,
which I had never happened before.
So that was a great experience.
It was new for everybody and uh,
got out of it and then just flew the suit as far as I could and up breaking two
world records,
one for the distance that you fly before opening your parachute.
And then the second one is they tack on the distance,
uh,
from when you open your parachute to when you touch the ground and keep flying
forward.
Yeah.
And I had a on heading opening,
so it just opened up in that direction and I was exhausted.
So I just laid there like a limp piece of meat and augured into the ground,
into a farmer's field.
Because I had no,
I had like,
my landing zone was earth.
I couldn't see the airport that I was.
I had some visual indicators Farnworth 18.25 miles.
So I got out of this bird and I passed.
You really get into a spin when you came out.
What happened?
Just nowhere.
I'm just not really good in a Wednesday,
and I didn't have the requisite skill or competence to the attempting.
What else?
It's tempting,
but it was a challenge in front of me and I was like,
of course I'm going to do this.
I hadn't,
I literally had not been jumping wingsuits I did that jump in August.
I got my first wing suit in December of the year prior.
It's not,
uh,
not recommended for people.
Uh,
so I got in the spin and I got out of it,
but I got out of the plane.
I knew where the airport was and I knew I was going to fly in that direction,
but I passed the airport at over 10,000 feet in the air and then it was just
looking at fields and data.
So I just put my head down and was flying.
I didn't have an altimeter on me.
It was awesome.
There was so many things that were just,
I was eyeballing it,
calibrate.
And before I went I was like camera one,
camera two,
camera one.
But I had just come back from a base jumping trip to Europe.
Thank goodness I had,
cause I'm flying,
I'm like this trees are looking really big.
Oh yeah.
Those trees are looking really big.
I'm going to pull,
you know,
moderately low opening altitude.
Flew straight into the dirt and yeah,
people are like,
oh you gonna cause it's been broken since then.
Uh,
a marine did.
And be like,
Oh,
you're going to go for it again.
But no,
never ever watch.
Right.
I got into the spin because the plane,
the Cessna Two oh six,
the caravan is not designed to be that high.
Like you'd had a supercharged engine,
a different propeller system.
Everything was stripped out of there except for the huge oxygen bottle.
It was just the pilot,
the oxygen tech and me.
And you know,
normally when you're Scott having,
they'll pull back on the throttle to slow down.
It called given you a cut cut of the airspeed.
Well,
if he would have done that at that out,
so we'd have fallen out of the sky.
So he's like guide his fist on the throttle with his foot on the dash pulling
back.
And I opened the door and I stuck my head out.
I was like,
oh no,
oh no.
And I'm jumping like the biggest wing suit on the market.
And they're like,
they're a combination of a prom dress and a straight jacket.
And I got out of the plane and it just inflated and I'm like,
Oh boy,
here we go.
That's good times right there.
Ooh,
yeah.
Coming at you full speed.
But you raised some money for the sort of foundation.
Yeah,
the,
it's like 150,000 bucks for the foundation.
And you know,
from that I developed a great relationship with,
um,
the CEO of the foundation is married to my first troop chief that I had when I
was at the east coast.
So there's a great tie in a and anytime.
Yeah.
Anytime that they call me though,
like my default answer is yes.
Like,
of course I'll help out anything that I can do.
And it,
I mean,
honestly,
like I wouldn't say that it saved me,
but it helped,
it helped get me back on the road that I should have been in to have a purpose
like that.
And then,
I mean,
I,
I bet ya,
I hypothesize that for you,
working with organizations and leaders and seeing the light come on makes you,
you know what I mean?
It's,
it gives you a purpose in life again,
to impart those lessons is exactly the same thing for me.
So one built to the other,
they kind of got my feet in the,
in the pool of interfacing with people like that and,
and I realized that it makes a difference and it's important.
That's awesome.
Well,
it's been awesome to,
uh,
to hang out with you.
Yeah.
I appreciate it.
Once every seven years we should do it pens and speaking of purpose and go,
Charles,
we know you have one purpose and that is to kind of inform anybody that might
want to support this podcast on how they might be able to do that.
Just to clarify,
oh,
here we go.
My purpose to inform is part of a greater purpose.
Okay.
Undisclosed for now.
Understand.
When you jumped out with a wingsuit and you went into the spin,
did you think that that was,
that was it for you?
No,
I never think like that day I would say somebody comment because I said the
other day on,
I forget.
I don't know if we had someone on the podcast,
but I was saying that like when I'm flying in an aircraft in a,
in a commercial airliner,
I think if this thing crashes,
I'm going to live.
Oh yeah,
yeah.
I'm going to grab this chair seat and I'm going to turn it into something.
I'm going to throw it in the water that's going to break the surface tension.
I'm going to live.
What?
The next question.
I'm not saying that it was gonna work out great for me.
I'm gonna Die Missing my fingernails cause I'm clawing my way towards victory.
Like that thought never enters the mind like,
okay,
I need to give up now because it's over about that you have that much of a
choice but you still fight period.
Yeah,
no,
that's good because yeah.
Yeah,
I'd probably be the same way
anyway.
Uh,
let's talk about some support.
Let's do it.
Let's talk about on it,
you know,
on it.
You heard the on it.
Yeah,
of course.
Of course.
You have everyone as you go,
you're good.
Perhaps just check,
hey,
I need it anyway on it.
Uh,
more Krill oil,
so I'm good to go baseline.
Um,
on it is a,
what do you call them?
A sponsor,
supporter,
supporter.
So if you want to support this podcast and or you yourself at the same time and
you're into,
you work out a lot,
um,
we recommend on it.
Supplements take on it's apartments.
It's the only one,
the best one anyway.
You want 10% off on it.com/jocko that's they get the 10% off.
Anyway.
Yeah,
that's a good and a good way.
The last podcast,
yes people know did.
Yeah.
We had colonel reader on here,
you know,
a Vietnam veteran and I pre-brief Echo.
I said,
look,
this guy's flying in.
He got up at three o'clock in the morning,
he's coming to here at six o'clock at night to do a three hour podcasts.
He's been in a conference all day when it comes to,
you know,
time to go through your stuff,
go through it quickly.
And people said,
hey,
did you have echo on a leash?
And I said,
we just pre-brief we're just respecting the colonel's time.
So I've get the feeling right now.
We could be paying for that.
Yeah.
Metaphorically I did have a leash for sure.
Usually,
usually I tell us a cool story because it's not like,
hey,
take a krill oil and then I don't take Krill oil or I take it in and I'm like,
whatever.
This doesn't work at work.
So during the week I work out and I kind of talk about my experience positive or
negative,
but in this case never negative cause it actually works.
It's one of the only a supplement companies that you know will work anyway.
I'm not going to go into any stories that only worked out a few times this week
and it's all the same story.
Why did you only work on a few times this week?
Oh,
various um,
thinks,
oh you know,
okay,
I worked out today.
What?
Okay.
No,
I'm just making sure.
It sounds like there might be some slack,
you know,
that goes world right now.
Yeah.
And you know,
maybe,
maybe not.
Let us even,
even if I told you the story,
it'd be a redundant story.
You know what I'm saying?
Like my joints feel good.
You know,
people know that already taking Krill oil,
that's what happens anyway.
If you like these supplements,
if you don't even actually,
if you don't know about the supplements,
get them and make your own evaluation,
you know?
Gotta listen to me anymore anyway.
So let's switch over to Amazon.
Amazon,
click through.
So how that works is if you want to support this podcast before you do your
Amazon shopping,
could@jockopodcast.com click on the Amazon banner then do your shopping
supports.
I made the sodium in the water analogy.
You know,
you know when you,
it's like,
it's not just sodium,
it's like potassium.
It's like heavy metals,
I think it's called.
You throw them in water.
Boom.
Big Explosion.
I make the analogy that clicking through Amazon is a small action.
Takes what,
three seconds,
right?
Yeah.
Maybe not even.
And you think,
Oh yeah,
I'm going to,
you know,
click through and I'm going to do my shopping.
That doesn't because of my action.
My small action doesn't,
it's not a big deal.
But here's the thing.
That's my action is a big deal.
It's just like sodium in water.
It's a be the sodium if you want to support.
Um,
so click through and do your shopping.
Boom.
That's a good,
good,
good way to support podcasts.
Also,
subscribe.
If you haven't already on Itunes,
leave a review.
Jocker runs him on stitcher,
Google play.
Not everyone has an iPhone.
I know.
Yeah,
I always,
somebody asked about some other thing to soundcloud,
soundcloud.
So I'm not 100% sure of how that works.
I explored soundcloud before.
Um,
unless there's like a separate thing,
it does push her how to do that.
Yeah.
If we're missing on soundcloud didn't then,
yeah,
I'm sure that that should,
should be where we should be as well.
Anyway.
Subscriber time subscriber.
Yeah.
To whatever the one that you're doing.
Google play iTunes,
whichever.
Subscribe.
If you haven't already leave review.
If you feel like it.
Um,
youtube,
we have a youtube channel.
Subscribe to that one.
Put more videos.
I know before when you were watching you were like,
hey,
these are just podcasts videos,
right.
Number,
some good stuff.
You got some good stuff that we do now and that's the point.
That's the point I'm making.
So we put more videos on there now.
Just made one that what yesterday.
Um,
that'll be up soon.
Anyway,
subscribe to that.
If you haven't already,
you'll get that.
So there's alert.
Is that one going to be out by soon?
Yeah,
few days rarely go Charles Video.
it's more mellow,
more cerebral.
Oh,
standby.
I then want you to,
it's,
it's cool.
It's fun I guess.
Anyway,
if you,
if you have the inclination to get a tee shirt as well,
Jocko has a store,
it's called Jocko store Url Jocko,
store.com t shirts,
rash guards,
patches,
velcro patches as well.
Uh,
the delivery time now from purchase to deliveries quicker.
No,
no,
that,
oh,
so yeah,
go there,
Jacqueline.
store.com.
If you like what you see,
go ahead.
Grab one of that.
That's a good a way to support.
There you go.
Ah,
but psychological warfare,
if you didn't know what to,
you know,
psychological warfare.
Yeah,
support it.
Oh,
there you go.
See how can you not really,
I mean,
that's a rhetorical question.
I think you're right about that.
So yeah,
if you don't know,
it's,
you know,
when you have moments of weakness,
if you're getting up early in the morning,
tarred,
tired on a press news or whatever,
or you're going to,
you know,
you're about to work out,
but you'll skip the workout because you're not feeling like it.
Moments of weakness.
You get this album,
you can download each individual track or um,
the whole album,
whatever.
Jack will get you through it.
It's like a spot makes you want to do the work.
I wanna wake up early anyway.
Itunes,
psychological warfare,
search,
Jocko Willink.
We're actually getting some requests now for other moments of weakness.
Yeah.
But like,
hey,
this moment of weakness,
we need to track this moment of weakness.
Need a track.
So like what?
I'm logging those down because someone was saying when I get tired,
oh,
in other words it's 10 o'clock at night,
I'm getting tired.
I still have work to do.
Yeah.
I think I'm just going to blow off the work and just go to sleep because that's
an easy route.
Maybe we need a track for things like that as possible because you know the
whole thing biologically,
when you hit the wall,
right,
that's your body really in a way saying like,
hey,
you're,
you're going too far.
But nowadays in our environment,
going to far is beneficial because you have this other goal that your body in a
way doesn't really know about.
So psychological warfare will help you get past that portraiture adi and check.
Exactly right.
Get your mind not.
Yeah.
So anyway,
jump on that man.
That's a,
that's the one that's supporting yourself fully anyway,
it has been number one since the day it was released straight up.
That's pretty cool.
I'm not mad at that at all.
Know why that is.
Why cause useful people are supporting the podcast and that's,
yeah,
that's pretty cool.
So thank you for way less people skipping workouts way more people are waking up
early,
obviously Gigo and those are the leaks.
Also,
while you're clicking through Amazon,
you can pick up the books that we review on the podcast,
right?
We just did my captivity in Vietnam through the valley,
my captivity tivity in Vietnam and it's a great book,
but there's all the other books that we've reviewed on there are on,
they're on here are on there.
So pick those up.
Extreme ownership.
There's a little book,
it's about combat
and it's about leadership.
It's about combat leadership.
Well,
what else is there?
What else would you want to read out about Jocko white tea?
A couple things.
Jocko,
white tea,
some people call it Jocko white tea,
some people call it the 8,000 pound dead lift solution.
You Know Leo [inaudible],
some people call it community because apparently you're hitting Camaro's very
solid when you get the t on also I've heard it called problem solver.
T because of the problems that you have,
little bit of tea,
Allston problems are getting solved.
So you can do that.
And,
and by the way it sounds like,
oh this is,
I'm just being,
you know,
exaggerating or whatever,
factual hundred and 47% factory
order tea,
Amazon,
uh,
you can also preorder way the war your kid.
And when people read this book,
it's Sorta like when people tasted the t we're going to have a supply issue.
I'm telling you.
So just order it.
If you order it now that way you get a copy and that way you won't be wondering
why all these kids are out there getting after it and you're going,
what's happening?
You'll know,
you'll know why they're getting after it.
Way The word kit.
And lastly also if you haven't signed up to come to the monster.
Yeah,
number three muster in New York City.
May 4th and fifth do it asap.
I've been seeing a bunch of folks on social media.
They're saying that they're going to be there so look forward to seeing everyone
is going to be awesome.
Obviously I'm going to be,
their life is going to be there.
Jp is going to be there.
Dave Burke is going to be given met Dave Burke yet he's coming.
I hear good things.
Oh yeah,
you're going to hear some real good things from Dave Burke and if none of that
really motivates you and get you in the game cause not hard core enough and you
really can't to get nuts.
Well guess what?
Don't worry.
We got you covered because echo jobs,
it's going to be that echo.
Charles is going to be there.
Come on down.
There's not going to be any hiding behind a curtain.
There's no backstage divas at this gig.
We're going to be out front with everybody interacting,
solving problems,
finding solution and basically just getting after it.
So come on down to the muster and if you want to give us feedback or comments or
continue this little conversation that we're having right here,
you can find us on the inner webs.
That means basically we're talking about Twitter,
we're talking about Instagram as well.
And then again,
we're also talking about that Facebook.
So Andy,
what do you on those?
Oh Man.
Uh,
on the Instagram it's my name.
Andy Stone.
Two one two very original,
I think Twitter is Andy Stumpf 77.
Awesome.
Original.
And you're on Facebook.
The book of faces.
Yes.
Contractually obligated to be on there.
Nice.
And
Echo is at echocharles and I am at Jocko Willink.
Echo.
Yes.
Do you have anything that you want to add to this podcast?
Man,
that's it.
You know,
usually I have some expounded on like some expanding question on putting man.
You kneel,
you're very articulate.
Yeah,
I use the words.
I understand it's two syllables are less.
Dang
man.
Thank thanks for having Matt.
Great to meet you ma'am.
You too daddy.
Maybe a closing thoughts you want to throw out there?
Uh,
no.
All I can say is thanks for having me on man.
So in 2024,
we'll do it again.
No,
it's great.
Great to meet you.
I go,
I mean I,
I sit back and I love what you guys have going on.
So just keep driving ahead man.
It's awesome.
People need to hear it.
Well,
I appreciate the feedback you've been given me on the podcast and obviously
thanks for coming on.
Sorry it took so long.
Sorry everyone,
it took so long to get you on and you know what?
Bullshit on 2024,
we'll get you back on here and we'll,
we'll do this again
like 2020.
Okay.
And um,
you know,
obviously man,
thanks for your servers.
Yup.
And it was my pleasure and your,
and your continued contribution to the teams and to,
and to our country.
So thank you for everything you've done.
And you know,
we started out tonight talking about the debt that cannot be repaid
and that is very true.
We cannot,
we cannot repay that debt.
We owe too much to those that have fallen for our freedom.
Okay.
But
you know what?
We can do and what we must do
is try,
try,
try to live every day with that thought in mind,
that fought of the service end of the sacrifice of those that gave their last
full measure for us,
for our freedom,
freedom,
this nebulous concept that can be so hard for some people to grasp of,
I will tell you,
it is a real thing
then it's a thing that's hard to recognize until Edis taking from you and the
chains of oppression,
control your body and your mind and then
win.
Your freedom is taken away.
That is when you realize that freedom is the most important thing.
The singular thing that gives each of us
be divine opportunity,
that owned be freedom can give
to think
and to speak,
and to do as we wish
and to do all of those things.
Be Holding to know,
man.
Yeah,
and yet,
wow with that freedom,
okay,
we are beholden to no one.
Let us choose.
Let us consciously and choose to be beholden for ever beholden to those men and
women who have relinquished their lives so selflessly
upon the altar of freedom.
Yeah.
For them,
beholden to them.
Okay,
let us live
with purpose and with passion.
Let us leave.
Live lives worthy of their solemn sacrifice,
but us live lives worthy of the price that has been paid worthy of the freedom
we are blessed with and worthy of those heroes
we are for ever
beholden to
let us live for them.
And I think that's
all I've got for tonight.
And so until next time,
this is Andy,
an echo and Jocko
out.